Hello, my name is Elena Proskora. I represent the company Moskva Business School.
I am an active business coach and consultant in the area of personnel management.
The theater begins with the hanger, and the entrance to the company is from the selection stage.
When the company has a personnel service, the main person in charge of this action is the personnel specialist,
whose main task is to select the personnel.
The selection of new employees is not only intended to ensure the normal functioning of the enterprise,
but also the future success of the company.
We present to your attention the video course on personnel selection.
The result of this video course should be
assistance to the audience in determining their role in the planning and selection process of personnel,
acquaintance with the typical sources of workforce, their strengths and weaknesses,
acquaintance with the selection techniques of various categories of personnel.
Quite often, a rhetorical question arises, who is responsible for hiring new employees?
It is clear that the personnel is a key factor for the success of any organization,
and mistakes in selection are too expensive,
especially when it comes to selecting the management link of the company.
The impression of the company, which is served by the searchers,
depends on the professionalism of the company employees involved in the selection process,
as well as on the subsequent efficiency of the employee's work in a vacant position.
To improve the selection process and increase the efficiency of personnel selection,
the leadership of the structural divisions, in which the personnel is selected, should participate at this stage.
In this case, the relevance of the understanding of the managers of various levels, principles and procedures
operating at this stage and the possession of the necessary knowledge and skills
becomes one of the key competencies.
This is especially important for small and medium-sized businesses,
where there is not always a staff service and where the leaders of structural divisions or line managers
are directly involved in the selection of the personnel.
In order to distribute the authority between the staff service and the leaders of structural divisions,
it is necessary to introduce a matrix of responsibility into the company.
There are difficulties that companies face when organizing the selection and selection system of personnel.
In particular, some of these problems sound as follows.
The company does not have a formalized and structured system of selection and selection of personnel.
As a result, the work is done in a chaotic way, as if from case to case.
There is no procedure for initiating the search of employees,
which leads to the orientation of formal requirements to the candidates.
There are insufficient financial resources to attract external sources or organizations
that can be additionally attracted to work in this area.
The level of qualification of specialists in the field is insufficient.
The absence of a clear self-image and market positioning of the company as an attractive employer is also a problem.
Before talking about the selection and selection system of personnel,
it is necessary to understand the place of selection and selection in the general system of personnel management.
The selection process is interconnected with other functions and charm.
In particular, inefficient selection of personnel can lead to the current personnel,
the reduction of the executive and labor discipline,
the deterioration of the microclimate,
the elimination of conflicts and, as a result,
the formation of an unattractive employer on the labor market.
The main prerequisites for the effectiveness of the selection stage are the following.
First of all, these are clear goals of the company, both strategic and tactical.
Effective organizational management structures that correspond to the goals of the company,
which are designated and formalized.
The attitude to the functions and charm to the strategic significance
and understanding of the importance of personnel planning.
Undoubtedly, a complex approach to the search and selection of personnel is necessary.
Regardless of the size of the company,
the typical business process of selecting personnel can be divided into several sub-processes.
I would like to list the main ones.
The first one is the determination of the needs in the personnel.
The second one is to obtain accurate information about the requirements for the employee
that the vacant position proposes.
The third one is to form a requirement for a candidate or a so-called portrait of a candidate.
The fourth one is to find effective sources of attracting candidates.
The fifth one is to determine the methods of selection.
The sixth one is to conduct a primary interview.
At this stage, we study the resume,
conduct a telephone interview and invite to an interview with the applicant.
The seventh one is to conduct an interview or a series of interviews.
The eighth one is to make a decision on the invitation of a candidate.
The ninth one is to direct the invitation to a job or a job offer.
And the tenth one is to prepare a new employee's workplace.
The selection process begins with the planning of the personnel.
The determination of the needs in the personnel or the personnel planning is the main part of the enterprise planning system.
The personnel planning can be started only after the determination of the personnel policy of the HR strategy.
If we try to consider the personnel planning isolated from the HR function,
it will not give the desired result.
The personnel planning is influenced by the production plan, sales plan, turnover plan, financial plan and other plans.
The personnel planning should take into account all the activities of the enterprise.
The personnel planning is aimed at determining the quantitative and qualitative needs of the personnel
for the strategic and operational purposes of the enterprise.
The selection process is planned independently of the type of the organization and the vacancies.
When planning the selection process, it is necessary to plan the work of the employees in the company,
so that they can devote as much time as possible to this work and not be distracted by other tasks.
Unfortunately, sometimes the selection process is not paid enough attention.
Then the selection is carried out chaotically, based on the wishes, and it is unsystematic.
The consequences of such neglect of planning can be as follows.
1. Duplication of functions.
2. Unloaded personnel.
3. Reduction of the efficiency of the personnel.
4. Unreasonable increase in the number of personnel and, as a result, increase of the load on the cost part.
It is necessary to start with the analysis of the work.
The analysis of the work is the central link of the comprehensive approach to the selection of personnel.
As a result of the analysis of the work, we can develop the positional instructions,
determine the requirements for the position and establish the criteria used in the selection process for the corresponding position.
What do we need the positional instructions for?
First of all, they determine the main tasks facing the employee and the functional duties that he will perform.
In addition, according to the labor legislation, in particular, the new edition of the Labor Code of the Russian Federation,
the investigator has the right to familiarize himself with all internal regulatory acts in the personnel section at the selection stage.
He also has the right to request a positional instruction in which he will familiarize himself with his functional tasks, duties and working conditions.
The positional instruction must be a living tool and a living document.
Unfortunately, quite often, the positional instruction is a dead child and carries no meaningful load,
not reflecting the real situation.
Based on the analysis, we can formulate the positional instruction.
What is a positional instruction?
The level of qualification and personal qualities of an employee must be formalized into a positional instruction.
The positional instruction is divided into several sections.
The option we offer is available, but you can form your own version of the positional instruction.
The first section is the information section.
The information section includes information such as gender, age, date, place of birth, education.
The professional section consists of work experience, functional duties, achievements, and personal qualities.
The professional section is a section on personal qualities, personal characteristics.
The requirements for a position can also be formulated in the form of competencies.
Depending on the category of the personnel, the competencies may be different.
Just like the division into categories, the personnel can also be varied.
We will follow the most optimal and minimum way and divide the personnel category into two main sections.
These are the management and specialists.
The requirements for a position and the competence model indicate the qualities a person should have to successfully perform his work.
The requirements for a position can also serve as a basis for choosing a method and a plan for an interview with a candidate.
In the next step, we move on to selection criteria.
The primary value for improving the effectiveness of selection has a definition of criteria,
on the basis of which decisions will be made on the advantages of certain candidates.
Let's take an example.
Company X requires an evening secretary, aged from 25 to 40 years old,
education not below the average of a specialist, an active user of a personal computer,
a knowledge of the system of electronic documents of speed, the speed of a typewriter, 150 beats per minute.
What does this information tell us?
It tells us that the company, first of all, by means of the formation of these criteria,
separates unnecessary candidates, thereby creating a filter when entering the company.
The trend of the latest time in the labor market is the formation of a competence model,
on the basis of which potential candidates are also evaluated,
which, in turn, is also a filter at the stage of entering the company.
What is competence?
Competence is knowledge, skills, skills, motivation and personal characteristics
necessary for a specialist, but the duties assigned to him,
to achieve his functional goals and fulfill his functional duties.
Depending on the category of personnel, competencies can be professional,
administrative and corporate.
Sometimes there is an additional term, such as personal competencies.
If we talk about which of the above competencies corresponds to a particular category of personnel,
then we can highlight the following.
In particular, professional competencies are primarily formed for specialists,
professional and administrative competencies for the administrative branch of the company,
corporate competencies for all categories of personnel.
Personal competencies can be formed for all categories of personnel
and describe the requirements of the person-seeker,
which will correspond to the subculture or microclimate of the structure branch,
in which a specialist is selected.
Lately, more and more often corporate competencies have been created in companies.
Forming a competence model in a company begins with the formation of a corporate competence model.
Why does this happen?
In a popular book by Jesper Kunde,
the author of this book, Jesper Kunde,
applied the theory of Alfred Adler to business.
He says that any company is perceived in three dimensions.
The first is the mission, the way we want to be seen.
The second is the brand, the way we are seen.
And the third is the corporate religion, which is what we really are.
In fact, this is influenced by three main aspects,
or, as specialists say, three main aspects of the brand's success.
The loyalty of the consumer, the loyalty of the partners and the loyalty of the company employees.
According to the latest statistics,
the success of the candidates depends not only on their professional knowledge,
skills, professional qualifications or professional competencies,
but also on the corporate, personal characteristics,
which are primarily based on values and which must correspond to the corporate culture of the company.
It is well known that the only conflict that is not resolved is a conflict at the value level.
The concept of corporate competence allows the company to reduce the risk of hiring people
who do not correspond to the existing corporate culture and, as a result, do not fit into it.
Unfortunately, there are quite often situations in the market
when companies spend a decent amount of money on expensive specialists,
hire a HR agency, increase the financial costs for the purchase of such specialists,
having information that this specialist was quite successful in the ranks of a particular company.
The specialist comes to the company and does not show the expected results from it.
Moreover, after a while, he leaves the company.
Why does this happen? For what reason?
Because when hiring, the company did not take into account the influence of the corporate culture
and did not assess the compatibility of a candidate with the corporate culture.
That is, the company did not have such a concept as corporate competence.
And one way or another, no attention was paid to this.
Therefore, the assessment of a candidate, first of all, with the presence of corporate competence,
implies an assessment of his compatibility with the corporate culture.
If the company does not have a model of competence,
in any form, and none, and there is no profile of the position,
then an application for the selection of a candidate is used to simplify the procedure of forming a requirement.
How should the application for the selection of a candidate look like?
There are no common standards and requirements for the content of the application.
As a rule, applications are formed independently,
based on the goals that must be met and the planned results.
Either way, the time and the charm of time change with the other types of applications that exist in their bases.
Of course, in addition to the requirements for age and gender,
the application must contain a description of the tasks that the specialist will solve in the position he or she is assigned.
In addition, it must describe the schedule of work,
the degree of probability of business trips,
re-employment, as well as the conditions on which the applicant is invited.
Moreover, if the conditions will change as a result of the trial period,
this should also be reflected in the application.
The application must be filled out by the head of the structural unit,
because he knows how and what the employee will do in the vacancy position.
In the case when the specialist has never faced the closure of such vacancies,
it is recommended to study the specifics.
I want to give an example from my own work experience.
At one time, my subordinate, a staff selection employee,
was tasked with the closure of vacancies of the loss-management specialist.
This is a position from the insurance market.
Until that moment, she had never faced this.
What did she do?
Actually, I was tasked with the closure of vacancies in such terms.
And the rest was on her shoulders.
She approached this issue quite creatively.
She called our loss-management specialists,
asked them a number of questions,
as a result of which it became clear to her the specifics of their work.
Actually, she went to see what they were doing,
and realized what these specialists have to face at work.
Then, it was much easier for her to select a person for this position and this unit.
The question is, where should we look for this staff?
There is an internal and an external selection.
The search for candidates can also be conducted inside the company.
Each of these options of selection has its pros and cons.
The advantages of internal selection are, first of all,
that the presence of internal selection of the company
allows to keep the staff in the company.
That is, the staff has a certain transparency,
an understanding of where they can move,
plans for development or so-called career routes.
The presence of internal selection improves the microclimate in the team,
increases their morale and morale.
That is, the staff understands that with high-quality work
they can get promotion and move up the career ladder.
This increases motivation and, first of all, loyalty to the company,
which is quite important lately.
Also, the evaluation procedure allows to evaluate internal candidates.
In addition to the fact that it is important for the business,
it reduces costs.
But internal selection also has its cons.
In fact, it can cause negative emotions for those candidates,
those employees of the company,
who, for one reason or another, are not involved in the process of rotation
or in the process of internal selection.
In the absence of an external staff reserve,
a part of the work, from which the employee rotates, may be cut off.
And thus there are risks of reducing efficiency and some financial losses.
To avoid this, it is desirable that the company always has a staff reserve.
A staff reserve of both internal and external specialists.
That is, a staff base, a resume of those investigators
who interviewed at a certain time for a certain position.
External selection.
The selection process, focused on external sources of search for work,
has the following advantages.
First of all, it allows to bring fresh blood and new ideas to the company.
It gives the opportunity to get information about the situation on the market.
It is also a way to form a positive image of the employer.
Provided that the quality of selection and the level of professionalism of employees is high enough
and everyone who comes, even those who have not yet joined the company,
brings positive information about the company.
Sometimes this allows to minimize financial and time costs,
since the procedure of retraining and training of employees,
can be costly and long.
External selection also has both advantages and disadvantages.
First of all, it is difficult to adapt to the corporate culture.
The duration.
Everyone knows that the period of adaptation is from 1 to 3 months.
On average, this is 3 months.
The leading link can be up to 6 months.
Sometimes it can be a year.
Also, there is a decrease in productivity during the adaptation period.
In addition, there are additional costs for attracting company employees as mentors.
If during the adaptation period employees are attracted to the company,
who are mentors,
and if this is not their functional duty,
which they do one way or another,
of course,
they are distracted by mentorship.
This leads to additional costs and a decrease in efficiency
in their main work.
How to organize the selection process?
The selection procedure consists of the following stages.
The search for candidates.
Various sources are used for this.
Then, the study of the resume.
Then, the invitation to an interview of candidates in accordance with the requirements.
Then, the initial interview with a staff specialist,
if there is a staff service in the company.
Then, the staff specialist conducts an analysis of the interview.
And those candidates who meet the requirements are invited to a second interview
with the head of the structural division.
In companies of medium and small business,
where there is no staff service,
usually, there may not be a second interview.
Everything is limited to the initial interview,
which is conducted by the head of the structural division.
Then, the decision is made on the invitation of a candidate.
If several employees participate in the selection procedure,
then the decision is made collegially.
Then, the invitation to work is made and the workplace is prepared.
Quite often, the procedure for selecting staff is formalized in a document.
In addition, the selection procedure may be different for different categories of staff.
I would divide the terms as a stream of recruiting
and selection of specialists, professionals and managers.
If we talk about the recruitment procedure,
it is quite common in the companies of the FMCG market,
in the financial sector, in the banking sector,
in the sales of services.
So, the recruitment procedure is usually used by the trade representatives,
insurance agents, operators, cashiers,
who are constantly in demand and, unfortunately,
are quite active.
Despite the fact that Western specialists say that
the level of liquidity in this category of staff cannot exceed 25%,
unfortunately, in our companies, the number can be 100% or even 150%.
Then, the main task of the specialist, who is engaged in stream recruiting,
is, first of all, to minimize the time costs
and increase the efficiency of the specialists who are selected.
Then the procedure looks somewhat different.
I would like to discuss the recruiting procedure of the trade representative.
Usually, after the announcement is posted in any of the sources,
we will talk about the sources a little later,
the incoming call is made.
The incoming call is made by a specialist in recruiting,
who gives some primary information about the vacancy
and asks a number of basic, simple questions to the candidate.
If the answers of the specialist in recruiting are satisfied by the candidate,
as well as the answers of the candidate to the selection specialist,
he is invited to the primary interview.
The primary interview is held in the department or in the department of personnel,
where the investigator fills out a questionnaire.
An interview is held.
Then, maybe, the specialist has already made a decision about the invitation to work,
or sometimes the supervisor is invited to the secondary interview.
The secondary interview is often planned as follows.
Taking into account the supervisor's schedule,
the interview is scheduled at the time when the supervisor is in the office
and can devote time to the investigator.
To minimize costs, group interviews are often held,
as a result of which the candidates who will go to the secondary interview are determined.
Sometimes the secondary interview is held in the same way, by a group method.
As a result of this interview, a decision is made about the invitation to work.
Now let's talk about the sources of personnel selection.
What are they?
Various channels can be used as sources.
In particular, these are mass media, such as newspapers, magazines, radio, television.
This is the Internet, where vacancies are posted on the most popular sites.
Recommendations of company employees.
We also often use the recommendations of colleagues from other companies.
Working with universities.
Providing information at the university, meeting and presentations with students.
Or working through the university's legal department.
Working with labor exchanges.
And also recruiting and advertising leaflets.
But this source is relevant only for a certain category of personnel.
In particular, it works in regions.
The selection of search channels depends on a number of criteria.
In particular, the category of personnel, the region of search,
the frequency of personnel requirements and the term of the vacancy.
I would like to consider separately the purpose of the use of a particular source,
depending on the category of personnel and the region.
For example, such a source as the Internet.
It is well known that in large cities, in particular in the Moscow metropolis,
one of the most actively used sources of selection is the Internet.
Depending on the category of personnel, certain portals are used.
But in the regions, the Internet is not so popular.
Even in St. Petersburg, the Internet is less used and less effective source of personnel selection.
Only recently, search engines from regions have become active,
partly due to the presence of certain Internet portals.
Newspapers also depend on the category of personnel.
If we talk about the lower category of personnel,
it is natural that they are usually searched through newspapers and magazines.
It is difficult to find a cleaner, a driver, a guard in the Internet portals.
As a rule, they are searched through newspapers and magazines.
It is as stupid to search for managers through newspapers and magazines,
if we talk about Moscow.
They are usually searched through Internet portals.
In the regions, the situation, as I said, can be exactly the opposite.
In the regions, in particular, a good manager can be found,
including through newspapers and magazines.
But the most effective source in the regions,
based on my experience and statistics,
is television.
It is a running line.
In some regions, particularly in the southern regions,
northern regions and partly in the central regions,
it is one of the most in demand and most effective.
Employment centers.
This source, according to my experience, does not work very well.
Although, if we talk about hiring personnel for some urgent work,
for partial employment,
then here, of course, you can find certain specialists.
As a rule, through employment centers you can find quite cheap specialists,
but from the point of view of qualification, from the point of view of professional experience.
It is almost impossible to find managers through employment centers.
Employee recommendations.
According to my experience, in particular, if we talk about sales personnel,
insurance agents,
this is one of the most effective sources.
Another thing is that such factors affect the effectiveness of this source
as the degree of loyalty of the personnel.
If the personnel is loyal, he loves the company,
then he will act according to the principle
you will not wish yourself any harm.
Also, according to the same principle,
if the head of the structural unit is looking for an employee
and actually recommends him to the personnel service.
Again, if this is not the case,
when the head of the structural unit himself is engaged in the selection in the company.
In addition, another source is the work with universities.
The trend of the last day is the activation of interaction with universities.
Why is this happening?
Because there are a number of specialties,
and there is a clear lack of specialists.
Not because there are few of them, but because there are simply no.
That is why it is becoming relevant to interact with universities
and to grow the future personnel from the student bench.
In companies, a whole program of interaction with universities is formed.
Then employees begin to learn about the company,
begin to come to internships,
to interact with the company at the stage of learning.
If earlier this interaction began at the 4th, 5th year,
or even closer to the diploma,
then at the moment, more and more often
companies begin to interact with their future potential employees,
starting from the 1st year, from the 2nd.
Another source that I would like to talk about separately is the HR.
This is an external source.
Attracting HR to selection is actually transferring the selection function to outsourcing.
This source, like other sources, has its pros and cons.
In particular, the advantage of HR is the presence of regional representatives of HR,
if there are any,
in the absence of branches and representatives of the company.
Unfortunately, the disadvantage is the decrease in the quality of the selected specialists.
In order to improve the effectiveness of interaction with HR
and the quality of the applicants,
it is necessary to form clear criteria for choosing a particular HR agency.
In fact, at the moment, what is the situation like?
Due to the fact that there are quite a lot of HR agencies,
there is no mandatory payment or advance
before the start of the search for candidates,
employers go by the principle of engaging in a fight, and then we'll see.
They start to conclude agreements with various HR agencies.
Who will offer them faster, who will offer them better?
And in the process of this work, we'll see who wins.
So what happens next?
Unfortunately, there are not so many highly qualified HR agencies that have their own databases.
Moreover, there are agencies that have databases, but do not work with them.
What do I mean by working with databases?
They do not track the professional life of their potential candidates,
who can be recommended in the company.
They do not specify and do not know what is happening with them,
where they work now,
if they have a need to find a new employer.
And as a rule, they use the same Internet, which is used by internal specialists.
What happens next?
A candidate is called with offers of the same vacancy to completely different HR agencies.
In addition, an internal specialist can call him in the same way.
Because when a vacancy is given to an external counter,
it does not mean that the internal forces do not continue the search.
In fact, this does not cause anything positive for the candidate.
As a rule, this causes irritation and a rather negative attitude towards the company and the potential employer.
This sometimes serves as a solution to refuse to interact with this employer.
And so the employer can lose the right searcher for him.
What criteria of the chosen HR agency should be used?
In particular, first of all, it is necessary to assess the terms of service.
This is the cost of the service,
this is the service to replace the candidate who is not suitable,
and the term of the vacancy.
The cost of HR agencies varies from 20-25% to 30% of the annual fee.
It is equal to one or two deposits.
Much depends on the complexity of the vacancy and the category of personnel.
HR agencies also take into account the employer himself.
How successful is the brand company,
and, depending on this, how well it will build its price policy.
The next criterion of the choice should be the territorial coverage of the agency,
that is, the presence of agencies, regional representatives or partners.
Also, the specialization of the agency or specialists who are engaged in the selection.
It is important to specify what tool and selection techniques this agency uses.
It is also very important to have the experience of implementing projects similar to yours.
And, of course, the experience of working in the field of your company.
It is an ideal option when a company without such experience is ready to familiarize itself with the specifics of your company.
In addition to the above, I would like to share my experience of cooperation with HR agencies.
I cooperated with HR agencies as a searcher and as an employer.
I can say that when I closed regional vacancies, I had successful projects.
The situation was as follows.
We had a structural division in the region.
At the same time, the restructuring that took place in the company
meant the creation of another structural division over the structural division in the region.
It is clear that the search for a higher structural division leader
could not be carried out by the forces of the employees of the existing structural division, the existing branch.
Therefore, we connected HR agencies to this.
I chose the Moscow HR agency, which had regional representatives.
I can say that the quality of work pleased me.
I will not name HR agencies, it is quite well known.
What I liked and like about this HR agency is that they are narrowly specialized.
They have specialists in certain areas.
Moreover, these specialists are not just in areas,
they also know the specifics of a particular business very well.
They know very well, in particular, in the regions,
the key specialists of this business.
Especially when it comes to the management link.
They collect recommendations not only from employees,
but also collect this information in the region.
Due to the fact that the regional specifics are such that everyone knows another,
and the world is full of rumors,
it is difficult to collect information about a particular candidate.
At the same time, the desire of the HR agency is to do this.
My guys did it, and they did it quite successfully.
Thanks to them, a number of vacancies were closed.
I have experience of negative interaction with HR agencies.
This HR agency was not Moscow, it was regional.
The game was chosen before I came to the position of HR director.
What did I face?
I faced the fact that the conditions in the contract were very specific.
They were exclusively in favor of HR agencies.
The fact that the management, that is, the general director and deputy general director,
who did not have a profile education related to personnel,
had no idea of what exists on the market, what are the conditions for interaction.
They chose a few years ago.
I don't know by what criteria,
but due to the circumstances,
this HR agency worked quite well.
It selected specialists.
But then the situation on the market was different.
It was not in Moscow, it was in another city.
And then people went to this city, one of the administrative centers of the raw material region, with pleasure.
Because the salary in this city was much higher than in the cities from which they were invited.
But time has changed, years have passed.
And, in fact, the situation on the labor market has changed.
The situation, including the regional markets, and the level of wages in the regional markets,
has grown and has become in line with the administrative center where employees were invited.
Then the question of improving the quality arose.
But what did the HR agency do?
The HR agency introduced a mandatory payment for the review of the resume.
Therefore, the employer paid about 50% of the amount.
I said that the cost of the HR agency's work is 20-25% of the average annual salary of a potential employee.
Hypothetically, the amount of the payment of the HR agency's work according to the contract is 100,000 rubles.
According to the contract, the employer had to pay about 50,000 rubles only for the review of the resume.
At the same time, the HR agency did not take any obligations on itself.
That is, if suddenly the employer does not choose any of the proposed resumes,
then the same 50,000 rubles remain in the pocket of the HR agency for this investigator.
This was certainly a situation when the HR agency took advantage of the lack of knowledge and professionalism of the company's leading link.
It is clear that there is no need to talk about any partnership relations in such a situation.
I happily parted with this HR agency.
I had to go to regional selection, that is, to go to regions,
because they still selected people for us from other regions.
I came there, I met people, had an interview,
and in the process of the interview I realized that people were initially misled not only about the functionality that they had to perform,
but also about the salary that the employer can pay.
Initially, potential investigators were deceived.
At the same time, I went on a business trip, I spent the company's money on a flight, on accommodation.
Unfortunately, this was not provided in the contract.
In this situation, in the situation of misleading potential investigators,
that is, providing investigators with incorrect information, the HR agency was responsible.
In particular, this is the situation with a non-qualified and non-partnership HR agency.
I also think that it is very important to produce statistics and analysis of the effectiveness of the personnel search sources.
After all, the question is not only in the selection of search sources, but in the fact that these sources were effective.
How can you determine the effectiveness of sources?
I want to offer you some criteria on which I have formed my statistics,
and on the basis of which I made decisions about how effective or ineffective a certain source is.
In particular, the scheme was as follows.
This is a kind of filter.
This is the number of incoming calls, separately for each of the working sources.
This is when it comes to the flow in the sea of ​​the circle, and the searchers themselves call.
The number of interviews recorded.
This is also for recruiting, for flow, when the searchers call and record.
Further. The number of interviews.
The number of interviews sent to the secondary interview.
I would also like to focus on the number of interviews.
There is a tendency, which I noticed, that some categories of personnel,
in particular, not only from the block of flow recruiting,
for example, this tendency exists among secretaries.
There were quite often situations when secretaries were invited to an interview,
they wrote down, they agreed to come to the interview, and then they just did not come to it.
I have encountered this, including with specialists in the personnel department.
With drivers.
And, perhaps, probably, yes, by the way, with system administrators.
Such an interesting story.
This is my experience, which may be useful and interesting to you.
Therefore, I think it will not be superfluous to assess the effectiveness.
Did the searcher come to the interview or not?
Of course, of course, here you also need to divide it into categories of personnel.
The next assessment position is the number of people who went to work.
Further. The number of people left after the probation period.
This is very relevant, including for those searchers who come to us on the recommendation of the HR agency.
Also for HR agencies, I would include such a point as the frequency of replacement of candidates.
As a rule, in contracts with HR agencies, only one-time replacement is designated.
But if you have been working with HR for a long time and in a number of positions,
it will not be superfluous to look at how often this replacement occurs, including in what categories of personnel.
It seems to me that such a very long-term assessment of the quality of the source is the duration of work in the company.
The longer a person in the company who came to us from a particular source works, the more effective he is.
The next block is the collection and analysis of information about the candidate.
At this stage, the information about the candidates is studied, which is provided in the form of a summary.
The selection specialist will make a primary selection of the candidate and look at the requirements that are formed in the application.
In medium and small companies, as we said, this function is usually performed by the head of the structural divisions.
That is, they make this primary selection of the resume on their own.
And now a few words about the primary interview.
The purpose of a primary interview is, first of all, to exchange information.
At this stage, you can call on people to look and show yourself.
Here, not only acquaintance with the candidate, his experience, personal qualities,
but also presentation of information about the company, acquaintance with the staff and features of work within this company.
In the case of a stream recruiting, as a rule, primary interviews are sometimes limited.
Sometimes a group interview is held for this category.
I have already talked a little about this.
Also, at this stage, the candidate fills out a typical questionnaire.
Sometimes the company develops several forms of such questionnaires for various categories of staff.
What is this related to?
As a rule, the higher the qualification of the specialist, the more complete his resume.
The information is clearly structured and in many ways.
In some companies, there are situations when they ask to write an autobiography.
This is much less common.
Because, one way or another, at the moment, both searchers and selection specialists
try to use their working time as efficiently as possible
and get the maximum information from the resume or receive it before the primary interview.
In addition, if there is a greater need in the staff, as a rule, it is necessary to close several vacancies at the same time.
And then the time resource becomes even more limited.
It becomes one of the most valuable resources.
By the way, this is a resource that cannot be fulfilled in any way.
Here, most often, and most relevant for the selection specialist and those who are engaged in selection,
is the planning of their actions at each stage of the selection procedure.
I want to repeat once again that time is the only resource that cannot be fulfilled.
It must be saved.
What are the selection methods?
In particular, one of the selection methods or one of the methods of selection is the use of diagnostic tests.
If these tests are used, then there is another additional stage,
where, one way or another, diagnostic testing is carried out.
The tests are different.
In particular, the personality surveyors, MMPI, or the so-called SMIL, which is adapted by SOPCHEK,
it is called, it is decoded, the standard method of personality research.
The Aizinko surveyor, Kittel, general abilities test, imitation test.
Specialists believe that imitation tests are the most effective,
because they simulate specific situations or simulate situations similar to those that the searcher will decide at his workplace.
But again, the question is the goals and results that we want to achieve using the diagnostic tests.
In my opinion, there are certain risks of using diagnostic tests.
Due to the fact that I have a second psychological education and additional areas of psychodiagnostics,
and, among other things, I was trained by diagnostic tests,
my attitude to the use of diagnostic tests is very ambiguous and, I would even say, very skeptical.
Why? I can explain.
In particular, one of the most valid diagnostic tests, the standard method of personality research,
consists of 500 questions, and the completion of this test requires 1.5-2 hours from the searcher.
2. In order to process and interpret it, you need to have psychological education,
and, secondly, additional areas of psychodiagnostics.
But, in any case, the quality of the interpretation of a particular test depends on the objectivity of a particular piece of information.
Once I was in a very interesting situation, which I observed in one of the Ukrainian companies,
when the specialists in the selection of personnel used the test of Lyudmila Nikolaevna Sobchik,
an individual typological surveyor, which was developed by her.
I saw how they gave feedback on the results of the interpretation of this test by the searcher.
Let's start with the fact that these specialists did not have any psychological education,
especially since they had additional psychodiagnostic education.
It was like people actually assert themselves at the expense of the searchers.
It seems to me that this is unacceptable, and no professional ethics allows this.
I would also like to say separately about the tests of intellectual abilities, in particular, the test of the same Kittel.
Due to the fact that the specialists continue to argue what the intellect is and what it consists of,
there is also a certain subjectivism in the assessment and perception.
In particular, during the Kittel test, I faced certain questions in my head.
When a person will answer questions about composers, he may not know Prokofiev, but know Sibelius.
He may not know anything about pistils and stamens, but at the same time understand quantum physics.
So, in fact, whether he has an intellect or not, the specialists still continue to argue.
Therefore, I want to return to the question of whether it is worth using, the question of goals and the results you want to get.
Unfortunately, I have faced situations when people were refused to work on the results of psychological testing.
Among other things, in Russia, this is a violation of the labor code.
In particular, the use of such a test as the 8-color test or the 32-color test of Le Cher at work,
in my opinion, looks ridiculous.
Because the psycho-diagnostic test of Le Cher reflects the momentary emotional state of a person at this moment.
And does not say anything else.
In addition, psychologists, when using the Kittel tests, they use not one test, but a selection of tests.
Among other things, they never judge the structure of a person's personality and personal characteristics,
even after the interpretation and selection of tests.
They always look at the dynamics.
Therefore, dear selection specialists and company employees who conduct interviews.
Of course, this is my opinion and my position.
The position of a person with a psychological education and an additional psycho-diagnostic.
But of course, it is up to you to decide.
I just want to return to the question of goals and the results you want to get.
One of the methods of selection is the group method.
It is used when it is possible to collect a number of candidates together.
In addition, the specialist who conducts the group interview is qualified enough to evaluate each candidate
during the use of various assessment procedures.
Now, the Assessment Center is used quite actively as a group method of selection.
In companies with a competence model, this method is used more often and shows good results.
It is quite effective.
A little bit about the group method of selection.
The group method of selection is when several candidates are gathered for the same vacant position.
They are given individual tasks, and the same ones.
Group tasks, cases, which they decide.
And, in fact, the specialists evaluate how they solve these or those tasks.
I repeat, the Assessment Center is designed to evaluate the quality of candidates
or the quality of the compliance of a particular candidate to the position.
In the current experience, the Assessment Center is used not as a selection procedure,
but as a procedure of assessment of the existing staff.
But more and more often companies turn to the assessment method,
including the group method of assessment and selection at the stage of selection of staff.
When the candidate has already passed several stages of the selection procedure,
he reaches the key moment when the decision is made
on whether to take him or not to work, and on the compliance or non-compliance of the position.
This is practically the culmination of the whole action.
The decision should be made, first of all, logically and collegially.
If several employees took part in the selection procedure,
it is necessary to collect as much information as possible from all participants of the selection procedure.
To increase the efficiency of decision-making, it is necessary to introduce a system of candidate assessment.
The characteristics of the assessment system can be as follows.
First of all, it should be based on objective information and give objective assessments of the candidate.
It is clear that we are all subjective, so we can talk about objectivity only when a system of criteria is formed,
which will allow us to objectively assess a candidate.
When we will do it based on the criteria system, and not on the basis of our own intuition.
In fact, the assessment system, among other things, should help employees involved in the process
to achieve better understanding when making a collegial decision.
And it should be a continuation of the policy in the field of staff management.
Key requirements of the relevant position are often taken as a basis for the assessment system.
The statements of candidates are assessed in points.
For example, the points can be on a five-point scale.
From 1 to 5 is excellent.
This scale has been known to us since ancient times, since our school bench.
But in order to avoid the risk of information distortion,
it is important to clearly specify and determine what we mean by bad, good, satisfactory, excellent.
You can see the example of the candidate assessment in your textbook.
The decision on the appointment of a candidate for work is accepted.
What's next?
One of the last agreements before coming to work is the application for an invitation or the so-called job offer.
The practice of applying for a job offer came to our lives not so long ago.
Most often, an invitation to work is written and contains the following points.
First of all, this is a detailed description of the position, the name of the position,
functional tasks, subordination, working conditions,
working day, possible business trips, possible retraining, payment conditions,
payment, variable part, that is, bonuses, and social package.
This is a detailed description of what is included in the social package.
The duration of the probation period and the conditions for the probation period.
In addition, if the size of the reward changes according to the results of the probation period,
it is also described in the job offer.
And, among other things, the date of the job offer.
The job offer is signed by the employer and sent to the solicitor.
Sometimes two parties ask to sign this job offer.
That is, the employer and the solicitor who agrees to the conditions on which he is invited.
And the last step is the preparation of the workplace.
What should be prepared?
First of all, it would be ideal if the worker on the table on the first day had a greeting.
Greetings and a wish for good luck to work in a new place.
A computer.
I can say that this is also very relevant, because at one time I personally faced a situation
when I waited for a computer for a month and a half.
It's good that I had my laptop and I worked for a month and a half with my laptop.
But such an approach is unacceptable.
Visiting cards, if this implies a status of a position.
Access to the corporate network.
A good pen, preferably with the company logo.
If the company has a formalized employee code,
then, of course, it should also be on the table.
And the employee on the first day should be introduced to the staff.
And, of course, it's even better and more ideal
when employees send information about the new employee's departure.
And it is desirable that they do it either in the morning when he just left,
or before he went to work, and not a few days after his arrival.
In conclusion, I would like to talk about certain trends in the labor market.
In modern conditions, a huge number of employers have faced the problem of staff hunger.
There are several reasons for this situation.
On the one hand, the increasing pace of economic growth,
and on the other hand, the consequences of the demographic crisis that occurred in the 90s.
At the moment, employers, like selection specialists,
reap the fruits of these successes.
The situation looks like this.
According to the proposals, employers exceed the number of staff resources.
The biggest problems are, of course, the regional markets.
If Moscow and a number of large cities are replenished from regions,
then there is absolutely no way to fill this staff hunger.
That is why the best staff flows to large cities,
first of all to Moscow and St. Petersburg.
The company is increasingly addressing the concept of an attractive employer.
But what is behind this concept?
Unfortunately, not everyone knows.
How to shape the image of an attractive employer?
And not only in the eyes of the researchers, but also of the staff.
Because when a company is in a bad situation,
it is difficult to find a good employer.
The main goal is not only to attract new staff,
but also to maintain the existing staff.
The company's loyal staff should be formed.
What should be the formalized and implemented measures outside the company
to attract the right specialist,
and what should be the formalized and implemented measures inside the company
to maintain the existing staff and to form its loyalty?
As I said, the loyalty of the staff is also important.
And there is a real struggle for the personnel and for the talent.
Unfortunately, the trends of recent years do not give hope.
The average working experience of employees in Moscow companies
has decreased to a year and a half.
By the way, some time ago this figure was from 2 to 3 years.
The situation is clearly deteriorating.
If we talk to our Western colleagues and Western specialists,
they prove that an employee becomes as efficient as possible
for the second or third year of working in a company.
And now let's look at the duration of the employees' work in Moscow companies.
Most employees do not finish their work until they reach their maximum efficiency.
The brand of an attractive employer is a component of the brand of the company
and its integral component.
What is a brand?
A brand is not a fashionable thing or a magic wand
that can solve all your problems.
It should be an effective tool for the development of the business,
a means of protection from competitors,
and, among other things,
a way to attract new, fresh people to you and retain the old ones.
The brand should be effective.
It's not only a brand,
but also a tool for external consumers and staff.
What is the key to create a positive brand of an employer?
First of all, the formation of a positive image in the labor market
gives a huge reduction in costs for attracting staff.
Because there are a number of extremely effective ways to retain employees
who understand that it is better not to leave such a good company,
and to attract new people.
Also, a positive image of the company, as well as of the employer,
increases the degree of loyalty of the staff,
and the loyalty of the company to the employees.
Especially if these goals are formalized and conveyed to the employees.
And, of course, a good image in the labor market
improves all possible marketing communications,
which leads to the growth of the profitability of the business as a whole.
I would like to remind you once again about Jesper Kunde
and the theory of Alfred Adler.
The image of an attractive employer is, on the one hand, a brand,
that is, it is partially two-legged,
one foot in the concept of a brand,
and on the other hand, in the concept of a corporate religion.
In psychology, there is such a term as congruence.
This is the correspondence of all elements that affect the perception.
If any of the elements does not correspond to the other,
the picture of the world does not coincide,
it undoubtedly affects the perception, image,
and, as a result, the reputation of the company.
It is difficult to imagine a situation
when the company has an attractive reputation in the external context,
while the degree of satisfaction of the staff inside is zero.
The same is true of the situation with the opposite accuracy.
When people are happy, happy, loyal inside the company,
and the searchers only receive negative information about their potential employer.
This is unlikely to happen.
As a rule, everything should be congruent, and this is how it happens.
The image of an attractive employer in the external context,
as well as the loyalty of the employees,
is a link in one chain.
It is impossible to solve only one task.
To set a goal in front of you,
to form an image of an attractive employer,
you need to remember that you need to solve it in a complex way.
Perhaps, it is necessary to start with the following,
to determine what the concept of the image of an attractive employer includes.
What is it?
What does it consist of?
Each company has its own idea of the components of the image of an attractive employer.
By conducting business trainings with a management link,
one way or another, we come to the topic of attractive employers
and start thinking about what is the image of an attractive employer for a particular company.
As my experience shows,
the characteristics and criteria that we form
are usually very different.
Of course, there is something that matches,
but there is something that does not match.
From what matches,
I have formed certain factors,
especially significant for the searchers,
because I conducted such surveys for the searchers.
So, what happened?
What is attractive for the searcher?
The company should have competitive wages,
corresponding to the market conditions,
a social package and a transparent system of priming.
Transparent and understandable.
The principle of contribution-payment should be consistent and uniform for everyone.
There should not be double standards in the company.
There should not be subjectivism in this matter.
The transparency of the company itself is an important factor,
as a result of the existence of a white wage.
The employer should keep promises given at the stage of the job invitation.
Employees also want to be respected.
They should be respected for their human dignity,
considering it one of the most important resources of the company.
For example, I can say that if we talk about the criteria of the employer's choice,
the trend in the market, in particular in Moscow, has changed significantly.
If some time ago, in the first lines,
when the employers chose the searchers,
they set the level of wage and career growth,
then at the moment they set self-development,
development within the company,
not only career, but also professional,
and microclimate in the team.
Agree?
The situation has changed.
The level of wage is self-definition,
but it is not the first priority.
Transparency is also important for the employees,
not only in the payment system,
but also in the perspective of their development within the company.
And the last thing I have already mentioned.
A favorable microclimate.
The team style of interaction is set by the searchers
as one of the first priorities.
It sounds sad for the employer,
but the market is behind the searchers today.
The right specialist can be lost at the selection stage.
What are the dangers of losing the best of the best?
First.
Too long waiting for the sent resume.
Unpresentable appearance of the person conducting the interview
and the bad condition of the room in which this interview is held.
Poor preparation for the interview.
Incorrect behavior of the interviewer
and non-stop phone calls.
When he conducts the interview, of course.
In conclusion, I would like to say
that it is necessary to remember
that not only the front office employees,
who interact with the clients,
but also the specialists who participate in the selection of the staff
are the tool for the formation of a positive image of the company,
which means the creation of a brand.
The impression of the searchers depends on their professionalism.
As a result of this impression,
the searchers make decisions
about the acceptance of the offer from a potential employer.
It is also important to remember
that the most effective advertising is the radio.
According to statistics, we transmit information to 10-15 people.
And those people are following the chain.
It is not difficult to read the result.
And then, the money invested in advertising
of the brand, in promoting it on the market,
will not contribute to the creation of a positive brand of the employer.
That is why it is important to remember
that the employees involved in the selection procedure
should not only conduct a qualitative and professional selection,
hire employees,
but also part with the staff.
Interview
Among the selection methods,
the interview takes a special position.
The interview is the central element
and is used most widely in the selection.
The interview allows you to assess a wide range of qualities
necessary for work in the supposed position.
The procedure of conducting the interview and the selection criteria
should be clear and transparent
to reduce the level of subjective assessment.
You need to be prepared for the interview.
When preparing for the interview,
you need to use the information
that the candidate has told you in the resume.
There are different types of interviews.
Interview, stress, monologue,
hiding, partner and testing.
We would like to show you the video cases
of the types of interviews.
Hello.
Please, take a seat.
My name is Polina.
I am the head of the Department of Personnel Management.
I will tell you about our company,
how long we have been in the market.
We have been in the market for about 15 years.
We are developing actively.
We started out as a small family-type company.
About 5 years ago we rebranded.
This was the result of merging with a large Western company.
We have formalized all standards,
in particular corporate culture,
internal business ethics,
telephone communication standards.
We have a certain requirement
regarding the appearance of our employees.
Our management gives great importance
to people being loyal,
working in the company for a long time.
One of the corporate competences of our company
is loyalty,
support for all innovation changes
that occur in the company.
The company is actively developing.
This is also one of the corporate competences.
Moreover, you know,
we have a great importance
for the creativity of our employees.
One way or another,
we develop innovation from the bottom up.
We took the basis of technology
that was implemented by Walt Disney.
We have many innovations
that are implemented by working groups.
One of them is called Creative.
The next group is called Criticans.
The third group is called Realizers.
Our managers love to look at the West.
We have certain rules
for creating a positive mindset.
Before the start of the working day,
we watch cartoons.
You know, Walt Disney cartoons.
By the way, we have standards
in the corporate literature,
corporate movies.
I can say that one of the corporate books
is Alice in Wonderland.
It is a very informative book.
Our management believes
that by reading children's books,
our employees can not only improve
their positive level,
but also learn many useful
and interesting things.
By the way, there is a Soviet cartoon
that also allows to create a positive mindset.
Imagine, Vitaly,
a cartoon called The Little Raccoon.
I totally agree with you.
It is a wonderful cartoon.
It is also a corporate cartoon.
Our employees watch it in the morning
before the start of the working day.
Besides Walt Disney cartoons,
they also watch cartoons about the Little Raccoon.
It is not only a part of the corporate standards.
It is one of the core standards.
Our CEO is a very ambitious young man.
He started from scratch.
He joined this company 15 years ago.
He was a simple salesman.
Now he is the CEO.
He brought our company to this level.
He created our corporate standards.
By the way, Vitaly,
how do you like our vacancy?
You know, you need to take a time-out,
think about it, and maybe…
Don't you like it?
You know, it is…
You need to think about it,
and agree with your employer.
You know, it is a very important position in our company.
This position has great powers.
Our company welcomes creativity.
You, as the head of this department,
can realize all your potential.
You know, we can involve you in other innovative projects,
develop other areas.
We have a lot of opportunities for people
who want to develop themselves.
You know, the Moslov Pyramid?
Those who are on the top floor of the Moslov Pyramid
are our most valuable personnel.
Based on your resume,
I realized that you are the person
we need.
Good afternoon, Vitaly.
We received your resume,
and, thank God, we met today.
So, you know,
we are a well-known international
clinic company.
And after reading your resume,
we saw that you have enough experience.
You know,
you will have to manage the claims department
in your position,
and your department will work with VIP-clients.
Let's look at the situation.
We are in a long-term relationship with the project,
so, we are responsible for the claims,
and we received the claims.
So, the client is not ready to pay
our services in the time set in the schedule.
In this situation,
imagine that you have to write a letter
to this VIP-client,
with apologies and an excuse
to get the payment in accordance with the schedule.
Please, leave this letter.
May I have a pen and a piece of paper?
Yes, of course.
You know,
you have a lot of graphical errors,
and you are very strict with the client.
Okay, let's imagine another situation.
Your employee did not send the letter to the client
in time to receive the claim.
Of course, the client was not satisfied with this,
he turned to you.
What did you do?
I mean, the client has not received the letter yet, right?
Yes.
In this case,
I call or call,
depending on the situation,
this employee and make him finish his work.
This is the first option.
The second option,
if there is such a…
Well, if the work allows
to connect another employee,
then I call him,
ask him to study the client's dossier,
and, accordingly,
to finish the work that this employee could not do before.
You said that your experience as a manager is 5 years,
before that you worked as a specialist for 2 years.
Tell me, please,
what claims management projects you had at that time?
This is just a reduction of the number of claims.
You told about 50% reduction of claims.
What specific measures did you propose for this?
I proposed a certain classification of all claims
on the places of their occurrence.
Was it a costly project for your company?
Well, initially, the investments, of course, were large.
But you understand that your area includes the solution of personnel issues.
Yes.
How do you see it?
I select the team for the tasks that I directly put.
So, we are talking with you about the goals that you put in the project.
Please, write down how you will cascade these goals
for each participant of your team.
Please.
It is clear that there may be other options.
Yes, of course.
This is what…
You have distributed the roles,
and what are the indicators of their effectiveness?
Of course, they are determined by the process in which they are involved.
Each process has its own goal, its own result.
Well, for today, I want to say thank you very much for your visit.
I will definitely contact you,
probably within a week or a week and a half.
And then there will be the next stage of the interview.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Vitaly.
My name is Elena Samoylova.
I am the Director of Personnel at the company MedService.
Nice to meet you.
I am glad to welcome you to our company.
I would like to suggest that we will build our interview in the following way.
First, we will talk about your experience, your resume, and, accordingly, your education.
After that, I will tell you a little about the company and the tasks that are presented to the candidates.
After that, you can ask your questions and we can discuss our future prospects.
I am satisfied with your plan.
Okay, good.
It would be very important for our company to know what your experience was at the previous place of your work.
In general, I have been working in this area for about 7 years.
Not about 7 years, but 7 years.
And for 2 years I worked as a specialist,
and for 5 years I worked as a head of the department.
Okay, and how many people were subordinate to your department?
5 people.
You understand that this department cannot be large, but it is quite specifically complex in management.
Vitaly, please tell us what was your most complex project in the area of claim resolution?
This project was at the last place of work.
We were producing doors then.
The doors were quite expensive, the delivery dates were violated,
and the client was not given a fully equipped door.
He was extremely dissatisfied.
For three days we had quite tough negotiations with him.
I managed to reach an agreement with him on mutually acceptable conditions for continuing cooperation.
How often did your company have complaints?
In the company, there were quite a lot of complaints in recent years,
but I managed to reduce them by about 50% in the last 3 years.
This is a very good indicator, in fact.
Okay, how can you characterize your main advantages?
My advantage is the ability to work with conflict clients.
I know and understand the essence of conflicts, I know how to organize and solve them.
I would like to move a little closer to our company and say a few words.
Our company MedService is an international-level company,
and this is a network of clinics for sufficiently wealthy clients.
The main task we set for the candidate to become the head of the claim department
is to manage the department itself and distribute the duties among the employees of this department.
The second important task is to work with VIP clients.
Of course, sometimes these are quite difficult clients.
But it is also independent work,
that is, not only the distribution of duties, but also independent work with these clients.
At the same time, this is a timely consideration of claims
and, accordingly, the solution of all organizational issues, both financial and personnel.
And the main task is to provide high-level services provided by VIP clients
and to satisfy the justified claims.
Okay, I understand.
I previously looked at the website of your company,
so I am familiar with the types of activities it carries out.
Now you have pointed out to me in more detail the area that I will have to face.
I thank you, Vitaly, for visiting our company, for your interest in our company.
And I want to propose the following scheme.
Within three days we will consider your candidacy,
and after this period we will contact you and inform you about the results of the initial interview.
Elena, in turn, I would like to thank you very much for such a comfortable conversation
and a complete disclosure of information.
Good afternoon, Vitaly.
Good afternoon.
I am glad to see you.
You know, you are probably aware of our vacancy.
I looked through your CV.
You have enough experience in working with claims.
Yes.
And we expect that you, as a person who has the appropriate qualifications,
will be able to cope with this task.
You understand perfectly well that claims can be of a completely diverse nature.
Yes, I understand.
But at the same time, I need to look at where there are shortcomings, mistakes, in order to correct them.
And if such an exchange is not clear enough, how will I do it?
That is, how should I communicate with the employees?
Look, everything is quite simple.
In a specific situation, if necessary, you will be required to provide all the information to the corresponding employees
who participate or work with this client.
In fact, the implementation of business processes is a fully formalized work.
We understand what kind of work and services we are performing.
The employees know perfectly well what to do and how.
In the event of some kind of borderline situation, you receive all the information on the request.
And, of course, this issue will be controlled by the management.
One of the managers will supervise all this work.
And to whom will I obey directly?
You will obey one of the general managers of the company,
depending on how your work will start at the time of joining the company.
Where is my workplace? Where should I work? How far should I go?
We have several offices in the city.
And what is my position?
Depending on the direction, depending on who you will work with from your colleagues,
we have places where to place employees, what to provide them with.
I would not even worry about this in your place.
And the number of subordinates?
The number of subordinates will depend on what you will be working with.
We will discuss separately what you will do, where you will be useful to us,
because we have options for applying such a manager.
Therefore, I think that based on the results of your abilities, we will decide how many people you will employ.
I have organizational abilities, I have the ability to work with a company.
Yes, thank you, Vitaly. I noticed that you told me about your previous experience,
about how you managed the group. I understand, I am quite clear.
Can you tell us more about your corporate culture?
What are your main goals?
You understand perfectly well that the specifics of our activities are assumed by a rather complex schedule of work.
Our mobile groups work according to a special schedule,
and we have a very strict schedule.
We have a very strict schedule, and we have a very strict schedule.
It all depends on how they interact with clients.
There are departments that work on a very similar schedule to the standard working schedule.
As for the holidays, it depends on the desire of the people.
These or those events may occur periodically.
Well, Vitaly, maybe you have any more questions?
I have no more questions. Thank you.
Thank you, Vitaly. I understand your competences and your capabilities.
Thank you for coming to us.
How can we cooperate in the future? How can I find out about my decision?
Well, you can call us later and find out the result.
Deal. Thank you.
Thank you.
I would like to start our interview with you telling us a little bit about yourself.
I have, in accordance with the requirements that you have presented in the open questionnaire format,
I have been working as a manager for 5 years.
Before that, I worked as a specialist for about 2 years in the client-related department.
So, Vitaly, did I understand correctly, based on your story,
that you did not undergo any self-taught training in the field of staff management and management competences?
Not quite. The fact is that you did not pay attention to my resume,
where I have listed a number of trainings on…
You know, I paid attention, but I did not quite understand that…
Apparently, your resume is made in such a way that it is not very clear
that this is just training in the field of management competences.
I have a degree in MBA, which answers this question quite specifically.
It includes skills of management competences of a manager, including HR management.
Please, give us some examples of how you used your knowledge gained in MBA.
What did you use it for?
I have already said that I have 5 years of management experience in the field of work with claims.
The staff I have worked with, I mean, managed, is about 20 people.
It is a large holding, where I had to deal with all the most difficult situations,
starting from the moment of organization of the department's activities
to the claims that my managers could not solve.
All this had to be solved.
Please, tell us, what is your management experience useful and interesting to our company?
I believe that my skills and experience, according to the formal characteristics,
which are announced in the vacancy and the resume that I sent you,
they correspond to the skills of the department.
Please, tell us, what is the priority for you in the choice of the employer?
Comfortable work, which is in normal working conditions, plus payment.
If you say that the priority for you, including the first one you mentioned, is comfortable work,
it means that you have missed our requirements, which were clearly defined as stress and stability.
The fact is that if I am stressed and stable, then for me it is a certain comfortable situation.
It does not violate any other, does not contradict.
That is, I understand correctly that in situations of pressure, pressure,
in particular, in working with difficult clients, you are comfortable enough,
as comfortable as with clients who are more laid-back.
This is a normal situation, yes, I can handle it.
Okay, give an example of a situation, such stressful clients,
which were pressuring you, and how did you manage to cope with it?
You know, there were different situations.
In particular, I take a recent example.
In that company, in the previous experience, I will give you.
The company was engaged in the installation of doors.
Accordingly, very often there were complaints about the issue of accessories.
As you understand, the price of the door is quite high,
and people who are able to order such a set, especially in an elite apartment,
where there are quite a lot of openings, these are very specific people,
who can be threatened, who can be used in one way or another administratively.
What did you do in this situation?
In particular, I applied what is called active listening.
In order to reduce the aggression that the client shows,
you need to listen to him first.
I showed him that I hear him, I am on his side.
I did not promise him to solve all the problems that exist.
Tell me, if the client is so aggressive that he is capable of some inadequate actions,
then most of the clients you describe are quite capable of such actions.
The security service is obliged to monitor the aggressiveness of the behavior of visitors.
You said that the security service should somehow react to this.
Your actions are obligatory.
We have a law.
You will not explain to a client who is quite aggressive,
is in an emotional re-energization, that he must comply with the law,
and thus you will make him even more angry.
You misunderstood me. Let's clarify a number of questions.
Vitaly, you yourself tried to say that the clients have very different,
some of them are even inadequate.
Inadequacy should not go beyond the law.
Of course, I am not an expert in who buys armored doors,
but probably you did not convey this to me in the right words.
Okay, Vitaly, I think that according to the results of our conversation,
you are not very suitable for us,
that is, you do not quite meet the requirements that we propose to these candidates.
Can you clarify what are the reasons?
In particular, stress resistance.
Do you think that I got out of my comfort zone?
Dynamics.
What did you not like about the dynamics of my answers?
Sometimes you need to react to a situation much faster than you do.
What do you mean by dynamics?
I mean exactly what I said.
The fact is that making decisions and talking are two different things.
You have not yet conducted an experiment on…
I have already conducted an experiment, believe me, Vitaly.
Yes, I am listening to you.
I have already conducted an experiment.
So you think that I do not meet the requirements?
Yes, that's right.
I cannot insist on this question.
If you think that you do not need me, then decisions should be made by people.
Naturally, of course, we make decisions.
However, I think that you are wrong.
But this is your opinion.
You have a right to it.
Yes, of course.
Both sides have a right to the decision that we make.
Okay, Vitaly, you convinced me.
I am ready to give you another chance.
Your CV says that you are still single.
Yes.
Tell me, please, why are you still single?
Officially, I am not married.
But I have been supported for a long time.
And now I am married to a woman.
So, you are planning to have a baby.
Of course.
Tell me, please, will your perspective of being single, especially having a baby, a family, and so on, interfere with your full workload?
No.
So, I understand that this is a normal working day for you.
You have to go to work on Saturday and Sunday.
Saturday and Sunday are not desirable, but in general, yes.
So, you are ready.
Yes.
I am used to working for a long time.
Okay. How long do you plan to work in our company?
It is difficult to say how long I plan.
It all depends on…
In your CV, there was a period when you had quite active leaps from one company to another.
You worked for three months in one place, then for eight months, then for a year, then again for three months.
This may mean that you are a leaper.
Not really.
The company was closed.
Okay, make your argument.
The company was closed, they could not stand it.
Did they not stand you in the companies?
Or what did they not stand?
They did not stand me, but the market competition.
I came to certain…
So, I understand correctly that you were unlucky with the companies.
Okay, Vitaly, I want to tell you once again that you do not meet the requirements of our company.
Vitaly, I want to thank you.
We were conducting an interview now.
According to the technique, there is stress.
I already understood.
I liked it.
I apologize if my questions and my behavior were incorrect.
But it was dictated by the requirements that we put forward to the employees in order to assess the compliance.
Thank you very much.
We will inform you about the results.
Thank you.
Goodbye.
Rustem, the founder of the company.
Hello.
Good afternoon.
Rustem?
Yes.
Hello.
I see.
So, you are Rustem?
By the passport Rustem, but at birth they gave me the name Rustem.
But in the CV it is written Rustem.
Rustem, yes.
I like it.
So, you have several names, like Stirlitz.
I see.
Do you know Rustem by his business etiquette?
Yes, of course.
I took a course.
Do you know that a woman is the first to say hello?
The first to say hello?
Yes.
According to the business ethics, a woman chooses whom to say hello to.
Despite the fact that business ethics prescribes one way or another.
It says that there are no men and women in the business sphere, but for women there is such a preference.
In fact, it seems to me that the first to say hello is the first to want to.
Perhaps.
You studied poorly in business ethics.
By the way, what position are we talking about?
Please clarify.
The head of the advertising department.
Yes?
I can say that I am a pretender.
It's good that you clarified.
Okay, Rustem.
Please tell us about your experience.
The last experience of work.
Can I say the penultimate?
I will tell you about the last company.
I worked in a regional company that deals in car and car sales.
How long?
For about 4 years.
Long-term.
For the last 3 years I was the head of the department.
How long?
3 years.
3 years you were the head.
And before that?
Before that I came as a senior specialist.
You came as a senior specialist and then immediately became the head of the department.
Yes.
I see.
What kind of merits did you get?
After I went to the selection, because there was a vacancy, our head went to top management.
And the vacancy opened.
And they made a competition.
I passed it.
You passed the competition.
Of course.
I see.
What criteria did you use to evaluate the candidates?
The criteria was experience.
What kind of experience? Professional or management?
It was the experience that was in the company.
But at that time you did not have management experience, as far as I understand.
You came as a senior specialist.
No, the experience of work was in this department.
In this department.
In this direction.
According to your resume, you only had a year of work in this direction, because before the TOGO, you were doing other tasks in other companies.
And you had a slightly different functionality.
In fact, it is possible that the functionality was different, but there were a lot of adjacent areas where I faced problems.
But you had tasks of the level of the executive.
Yes.
You were transferred from the executive level to the managerial level.
What did your managers see in you that they decided to entrust this position to you?
I am active, I can communicate with people, I can set goals and fulfill them.
Okay, give an example of when you managed to set goals and fulfill them.
Before us, before the department, before all the employees, a goal was set.
By the way, tell me, please, you, as a manager, should know and understand how goals are formed, because at the planning stage, this is one of the quite important tasks of the chief.
What is the difference between a goal and an intention?
A goal and an intention?
Yes.
Well, if we take the smart system, it is specific, it is achievable, it is measurable.
And an intention?
An intention is a more vague concept.
An intention sets the direction.
Okay, a dream?
A dream is a personal fantasy.
Can you tell me any goal?
In particular, the goal in the department in which you headed.
Yes.
This is to reduce the flow of complaints from 100, for example, a month, to 50, exactly twice.
To the full extent of the month.
I see.
Okay, can you tell me now, why, as you think, you are…
I am you.
Yes.
Well, first of all, I can say the following.
I have professional experience in this area, I have competences that are stated in the vacancy, which are suitable, in my opinion, for you.
Also…
How many subordinates did you have in your direct subordination?
Seven people.
Okay.
Tell me, please, are there any successes of yours as a manager in terms of growing successors?
Yes, of course.
For example?
Because now my choice…
What did you do, by the way?
What did you do, please, to make people…
No, not to find, but to grow worthy successors from existing employees.
You are leaving the company now.
Is there anyone you have grown up with, who you can recommend to your position now?
Yes, of course. I have already recommended him and he has already been hired.
Okay, then tell me, please, how did you agree with the employers that you are leaving?
You understand that if an employee is valuable, then he is being left one way or another, through some counter-offer.
As far as I understand, your management has agreed that you are leaving.
Yes, of course.
So, there are two options. Either it is happy to part with you, or you have somehow argumented and convinced.
In my opinion, my position is that the company's direction vector was not directed towards the maximum development, that is, to the federal and international level.
My ambitions were much higher, and my boss, my general director, understood this.
And we had a sharp negotiation.
Okay, then I have a question. I think you have quite big ambitions.
And if, let's say, tomorrow our company ceases to meet your ambitions, will you leave it as well?
Suddenly? In one day?
No, your company is 10 years old, and it needs to work successfully.
I think it is unrealistic to lose all these ambitions in one day.
If, let's say, you understand that you are not able to realize your ambitions within the framework of our company, then, accordingly, you will leave the company. Am I right?
I think that's how I can answer.
The following way is that while I am effective for your company, I will work here.
Let's imagine that your ambitions are not realized. What will you do?
The point is that we will look for the person who is to blame.
Either I set the goals incorrectly and my ambitions are unrealistic, and therefore there is a mismatch with the company's ambitions, or something has changed.
Okay, and how often do your goals change? And what are the last goals you set?
The goal is professional, not personal.
Of course.
The professional goal in the previous company was to bring the advertising department to a new level, that is, to reduce the minimum costs as far as the claims are concerned.
I fulfilled this goal. One of the criteria was stability.
And now? I think you have achieved this goal.
Yes.
And what is the new goal?
The professional goal is to find a company that will meet both my requirements and the company's requirements and reach a new professional level.
The company must meet your ambitions, am I right?
My criteria, ambitions, and values.
Okay, if you have such big ambitions, then your ambitions are also related to the salary.
Of course.
Tell me, in your opinion, what salary do you deserve and why do you think so?
Yes, I understand. At the moment, I think I have the right to claim a salary of 4,000 euros.
The first argument is my experience, professionally successful as a manager of this department.
The second is that I am professionally competent.
By the way, I apologize, I did not introduce myself. My name is Polina, I am the head of the management department.
Nice to meet you, Polina. I just read your business cards at the beginning.
I did not give you a business card. Apparently, someone else gave it to you.
The manager said that Polina will come now.
Are you working now?
Yes, I am now in the process of transferring my obligations.
I see. Your employers are aware that you are considering the offer?
Yes, of course.
Thank you very much for the interview.
I would like to inform you that you were interviewed by Stress.
Thank you.
If there were any questions or my comments, or maybe my emotional reactions were uncomfortable for you, I apologize for them.
We will definitely inform you about the results of your interview.
Thank you very much.
The next step in the interview is to receive recommendations about the candidate.
To understand how to get recommendations for a candidate, we suggest you watch the video case on the procedure of obtaining recommendations.
Yes, I'm listening.
Hello.
Good afternoon.
Gennady Anatolyevich?
Yes.
My name is Polina. I represent the company Vetera Zvezda International.
Yes, what is your business?
I am a personal manager in our company. Could you give me 10-15 minutes of your time?
I'm a little busy, but no more than 10 minutes.
Okay, thank you very much.
I would like to get recommendations for a candidate who is considered by us as the head of the claimant's department.
Is this Albert Znamensky?
Yes.
Could you answer a number of questions that I want to ask you?
Yes, I'm listening.
Please tell me, during what period did you work with Albert Petrovich?
About a year and a half.
I see, thank you. Could you tell me about your professional relations with him?
He worked in our department as a claimant, as a leading specialist, and fulfilled all his functions, which should be.
Everything seemed to be in order.
So, you are evaluating his professional activity as good, because you said that everything was in order?
I think it was quite good. He worked for us for more than a year. He probably achieved some results, otherwise he would not be able to work in our company.
How do you think he interacts with other people?
He worked in the department that deals with claims, but apparently he has the ability to have relations with people, to talk, to explain himself. I understand this.
And if you compare him with your other employees, how can you evaluate him?
It's hard for me to say. I think he worked quite similarly. There are people who work better, there are people who work a little worse.
But the results are basically the same.
So, he worked well?
He worked well enough.
Tell me, please, how do you evaluate his potential, in particular, the potential of growth?
Judging by the fact that he is a young man, I think he has a growing potential.
I see, thank you. Tell me, please, why does he decide to leave your company?
I cannot answer for the decision of an employee. Apparently, there are some reasons that led him to this decision. I don't think I can help you with this.
So, he just made this decision?
Yes, he made a statement.
And you didn't clarify?
I don't know. I didn't receive any direct information. The head of the department just informed me that this person was going to leave our company.
Tell me, please, how ready is he to make a decision and to solve any problems, in particular, conflict situations?
Conflict situations within the team?
He is also successful?
At least, as far as I know, there were no incidents, no events that were out of control in the company, and in particular, in the department where he worked, never.
Tell me, please, how initiative is he?
I think it is better to ask this question to the head of the department. I can hardly answer you.
How stable and balanced is he in your opinion?
I think that a person who works in a single company like ours today should be of such qualities. Although, maybe he will not cope with this, and therefore he is going to leave our company.
I see. Another question. Tell me, please, is he more of a team player or an individual?
He worked as a specialist, as a leading specialist, sometimes he worked in a group, but not in a team. He is more of a team player.
In your opinion, is he easy to manage? Is he able to obey?
I can't give you any criteria from the point of view of the management, any incidents, events, investigations.
Tell me, please, does he take the position of the manager more often or is he able to express his point of view?
We have regular discussions in the company, work in different groups, and each employee can express his opinion, suggestions, suggestions, criticism,
about the work of the department, about the work of the manager. We have an open access to the higher managers.
I see. Could you tell me, who else can recommend him?
I think that it is possible to apply to the manager under the name of the person who works there.
Can I use his name?
Well, his name is Vadim Petrovich Pankratov. If you ask the secretaries, they will help you to connect with them.
Okay, thank you very much for your time.
You are welcome.
Thank you, goodbye.
Yes, I'm listening.
Hello.
Good afternoon.
My name is Polina. I represent the company Vitya Zvezda International.
Could you give me a few minutes?
Yes, I'm listening.
I would like to get recommendations for your employee, Znamensky Albert Petrovich.
Yes, I'm listening. What did you want to know?
I would like to ask you a few questions.
Tell me, please, when did the candidate work in your company?
He worked in our company from March 2006 to September 2007.
What kind of interactions did you have with him?
The thing is that Albert Petrovich worked as a leading specialist in the claimant's department.
And since he was engaged in the most difficult cases, worked with VIP clients, I interacted with him quite often.
Mostly with the most difficult, the most capricious clients.
I see.
Could you please clarify who was his direct supervisor?
His supervisor was Vadim Sergeevich Paramonov.
Thank you.
Could you tell me what results he achieved during his work?
Well, I can say the following.
During the work of Albert Petrovich, the number of repeated claims significantly decreased,
especially in the most significant cases, the most capricious and important clients.
Did you have any unresolved issues?
I don't remember such events, as far as I understand.
We closely monitor the results of the work with the claims,
because clients are important to us, as well as to any other company.
And if this had happened, I would definitely know about it.
Did he make any independent decisions?
He replaced the supervisor.
He led some projects related to the organization of the work of the group of employees.
And he showed himself as a person capable of making decisions and being responsible for the actions he performs.
Did you set him goals, set tasks for employees during the delegation of authority?
Yes, of course.
He replaced the supervisor, he carried out some projects, and he copes with this quite successfully.
Tell me, please, in your opinion,
is it possible for him to inform employees about such situations,
in particular, about the unpleasant decisions of the management?
Yes, he shows experience.
I told you that I had to work with him in some cases directly,
and with people who worked with him.
He can adequately convey information,
can build good relations with his subordinates, with his colleagues.
How can we characterize the microclimate,
which, in your opinion, was created by Albert Petrovich when he remained as the supervisor?
You know, I liked it very much when he worked.
Why? Because his age and the age of his colleagues,
with whom he remained to work, they are much closer.
Vadim Sergeevich is a more mature person,
and they created such an atmosphere of social competition,
of joint, friendly work, team work.
I see. I would also like to ask such a question.
Tell me, please, does he know how to leave his point of view in an argument?
Yes, of course. He worked with particularly complex claims, complex questions,
and it is really quite a serious job to find argumentative objections
or answers to the claims of quite serious companies and their representatives.
He also copes with this great.
And if he had to defend his point of view in front of the superiors,
or in discussions with employees, did he manage to do it?
As far as I remember, I was present at some quite hot meetings.
A person is sane, does not lose his head, can argue,
can insist on his own, but at the same time does not break down in emotions,
in some situations that would not be suitable for exit.
In my opinion, he is quite successful.
Gennady Anatolyevich, could you clarify to what extent of complexity
the decision had to be made by Albert Petrovich?
Well, I can say that he met and participated in absolutely different situations.
I have already said that he was engaged in particularly complex issues,
in the analysis of special and significant claims from important clients,
and he brilliantly showed how a specialist is able to solve issues at different levels of complexity.
Could you tell me, please, did he have to make a strategic decision?
Yes. Some time ago, about a year ago,
it was decided to change the structure of the departments
that work with the claims of our clients,
and he participated in the formation of a new structure
and determining the degree of responsibility and the limit of responsibility for different departments.
Could you clarify, what methods of motivation does Albert Petrovich choose most often?
Well, I can say that, in my opinion, he successfully combines
both material and non-material motivation.
He can offer an example of someone from the distinguished employees,
and he can also mark an employee, by working in a team,
praise, highlight, or mark as the best employee of the month, for example.
And from the point of view of making decisions on the material motivation of employees,
what is he guided by most often?
Well, in this sense, I can say that we have some kind of internal procedure,
and, in principle, Albert Petrovich always argues,
and can prove with numbers in his hands why and how
he has formed a proposal for the awarding of employees.
Okay. Thank you very much, Gennady Anatolyevich.
You are welcome.
Thank you.
All the best. Goodbye.
In conclusion, I would like to talk about the efficiency of the process of searching and selecting personnel.
Various quantitative indicators are used to assess the efficiency of the process of searching and selecting personnel.
Such as the level of liquidity,
statistics on new employees are individually conducted,
the share of employees who have not passed the test period,
from the total number of people hired,
the financial costs for ensuring the process of searching and selecting personnel,
the level of violation of labor discipline among new employees,
such as delays, breaks, and so on.
The level of marriage and errors made by new employees,
this is primarily for manufacturing companies.
The frequency of equipment breakdowns,
also characteristic of manufacturing companies.
The level of manufacturing trauma,
also there.
And the number of complaints from clients, partners,
external counteragents who have acted in the name of new employees.
Also, the information about the quality of the selection system used in the organization
can be obtained from the following sources.
First of all, from the candidates themselves,
from the employees of the organization,
and from the dismissing employees.
Interviews, surveys, and surveys can be used for this.
There is a danger of direct financial losses
that the organization may incur in the process of searching and selecting candidates.
What are the losses?
First, these are losses related to production activities.
Low labor productivity, low profit, low quality of products and services.
Impairment of the reputation of the organization,
and as a result, an unpleasant image of the organization in the eyes of clients and external counteragents.
And losses related to manufacturing trauma.
Expenses related to training, transfer, and dismissal of employees.
And also expenses related to low quality of selection.
That is, actually, the expenses or cost of searching, selecting, and training new employees.
In addition to direct financial losses, there are also indirect financial losses.
What is the indirect financial loss of selection errors?
First of all, the loss of working time of the managers and specialists who are involved in this process.
Also, the high level of personnel liquidity is related to this.
The consequence of a high level of personnel liquidity is undoubtedly a deterioration of the microclimate in the team.
And as a result, a decrease in motivation and the degree of satisfaction of the staff.
Owners and managers of various levels should remember
that unqualified management of both business and staff can lead to financial losses in the long term.